Graphics Device:
It is something where you can make a plot appear, either a screen device, such as a window on your computer, OR a file device.

There are several different kinds of file devices with particular characteristics and hence uses. These include PDF, PNG, JPEG, SVG, and TIFF. When you make a plot in R, it has to be "sent" to a specific graphics device. Usually this is the screen (the default device), especially when you're doing exploratory.

There are two basic approaches to plotting. The first, plotting to the screen, is the most common. It's simple - you call a plotting function like plot, xyplot, or qplot.
The second way to create a plot is to send it to a file device. Depending on the type of plot you're making, you explicitly launch a graphics device, e.g., a pdf file.

when plotting to a file device, you have to close the device with the command dev.off() and it will be saved in working directory.

There are two basic types of file devices, vector and bitmap devices. These use different formats and have different characteristics. 
a) Vector formats are good for line drawings and plots with solid colors using a modest number of points, while 
b) bitmap formats are good for plots with a large number of points, natural scenes or web-based plots.

4 specific vector formats. The first is pdf. This is useful for line-type graphics and papers. It resizes well, is usually portable, but it is not efficient if a plot has many objects/points.
The second is svg which is XML-based, scalable vector graphics. This supports animation and interactivity and is potentially useful for web-based plots.
The last two vector formats are win.metafile, a Windows-only metafile format, and postscript (ps), an older format which also resizes well, is usually portable, and can be used to create encapsulated postscript files. Unfortunately, Windows systems often don’t have a postscript viewer.


4 different bitmap formats. The first is png (Portable Network Graphics) which is good for line drawings or images with solid colors. It uses lossless compression (like the old GIF format), and most web browsers can read this format natively. In addition, png is good for plots with many points, but it does not resize well.

In contrast, jpeg files are good for photographs or natural scenes. They use lossy compression, so they're good for plots with many points. Files in jpeg format don't resize well, but they can be read by almost any computer and any web browser. They're not great for line drawings.

The last two bitmap formats are tiff, an older lossless compression meta-format and bmp which  is a native Windows bitmapped format.


dev.cur() to see what integer your plotting window is assigned.

You can also copy a plot from one device to another. This can save you some time but beware! Copying a plot is not an exact operation, so the result may not be identical to the original. R provides some functions to help you do this. The function dev.copy copies a plot from one
device to another, and dev.copy2pdf specifically copies a plot to a PDF file.

SOURCE: SWIRL COURSE