Three plotting systems in R:

The first plotting system is the Base Plotting System which comes with R. It's the oldest system which uses a simple "Artist's palette" model. What this means is that you start with a blank canvas and build your plot up from there, step by step.

Usually you start with a plot function (or something similar), then you use annotation functions to add to or modify your plot. R provides many annotating functions such as text, lines, points, and axis. R provides documentation for each of these. They all add to an already existing plot.

The base system is very intuitive and easy to use when you're starting to do exploratory graphing and looking for a research direction. You can't go backwards, though, say, if you need to readjust margins or fix a misspelled a caption. A finished plot will be a series of R commands, so it's difficult to translate a finished plot into a different system.

Second plotting system, the Lattice System which comes in the package of the same name. Unlike the Base System, lattice plots are created with a single function call such as xyplot or bwplot. Margins and spacing are set automatically because the entire plot is specified at once.

The lattice system is most useful for conditioning types of plots which display how y changes with x across levels of z. The variable z might be a categorical variable of your data. This system is also good for putting many plots on a screen at once.

The lattice system has several disadvantages. First, it is sometimes awkward to specify an entire plot in a single function call. Annotating a plot may not be especially intuitive.
Second, using panel functions and subscripts is somewhat difficult and requires preparation.
Finally, you cannot "add" to the plot once it is created as you can with the base system.

Last plotting system, ggplot2, which is a hybrid of the base and lattice systems. It automatically deals with spacing, text, titles (as Lattice does) but also allows you to annotate by "adding" to a plot (as Base does), so it's the best of both worlds.

Although ggplot2 bears a superficial similarity to lattice, it's generally easier and more intuitive to use. Its default mode makes many choices for you but you can still customize a lot. The package is based on a "grammar of graphics" (hence the gg in the name), so you can control the aesthetics of your plots. For instance, you can plot conditioning graphs and panel plots as we did in the lattice example.


SOURCE: SWIRL COURSE